
## Class : existence ends with

 * *IRI* = http://purl.obolibrary.org/obo/RO_0002493
 * *Label* = existence ends with
 * *Definition* = x existence ends with y if and only if the time point at which x ends is equivalent to the time point at which y ends. Formally: x existence ends with y iff ω(x) = ω(y).
 * *Comment* = The relations here were created based on work originally by Fabian Neuhaus and David Osumi-Sutherland. The work has not yet been vetted and errors in definitions may have occurred during transcription.

## Synonyms


## Cross-references


## Subsets


## SuperProperties

 * [existence ends during](../../RO/92/RO_0002492.md)

## SubProperties


## Other Logical Axioms

 * [existence ends with](../../RO/93/RO_0002493.md) SubPropertyOf [existence ends during](../../RO/92/RO_0002492.md)

## Other Annotations

 * *[definition](../../IAO/15/IAO_0000115.md)* = x existence ends with y if and only if the time point at which x ends is equivalent to the time point at which y ends. Formally: x existence ends with y iff ω(x) = ω(y).
 * *[term editor](../../IAO/17/IAO_0000117.md)* = Chris Mungall
 * *[rdf-schema#comment](../../nt/rdf-schema#comment.md)* = The relations here were created based on work originally by Fabian Neuhaus and David Osumi-Sutherland. The work has not yet been vetted and errors in definitions may have occurred during transcription.
 * *[rdf-schema#label](../../el/rdf-schema#label.md)* = existence ends with

## Usage

 * -
 * SubObjectPropertyOf(ObjectPropertyChain( <http://purl.obolibrary.org/obo/RO_0002593> InverseOf(<http://purl.obolibrary.org/obo/RO_0002593>) ) <http://purl.obolibrary.org/obo/RO_0002493>)
 * [existence ends with](../../RO/93/RO_0002493.md) SubPropertyOf [existence ends during](../../RO/92/RO_0002492.md)

## External Comments

