#summary Design pattern for interaction relations

= Introduction =

We frequently want interaction relations to 'shadow' biological process relations. This document describes our current implementation for this.

The implementation is not perfect, comments welcome

NOTE: THIS DOCUMENTATION NEEDS TO BE UPDATED WHEN ONTOBEE IS BACK UP

= Details =

Whether dealing with biotic relations, or protein-protein interactions, we frequently have to deal with the fact that OWL forces us to choose whether model something with an instance of an object property.

For example, if protein A interacts with B, this can be represented as a triple / object property assertion

{{{
a interactsWith b
}}}

(where a and b are instances)

Or

{{{
ixn rdf:type Interaction
ixn has-participant a
ixn has-participant b
}}}

(note: not quite as simple on the class level, the first pattern may need to assert a reciprocal)

Both have uses. In RO we take the process representation as being *primary* and shadow these as relations.

Unfortunately, OWL is not expressive enough to properly interconvert between these forms. There is a way to partially express, this but unfortunately it is rather abstruse...

=== Pattern ===

To relationalize a process class P:

  ## Create a process "isP"
  ## Manually place isP in the http://purl.obolibrary.org/obo/RO_0002464 'helper' hierarchy. Place as deep as possible
  ## Create an object property "P to" (e.g. interacts in protein-protein interaction with)
  ## Manually place P-to in the object property hierarchy
  ## Create a property chain axiom (see below)
  ## Declare characteristics (symmetric, transitive) as appropriate
  ## Create the inverse property, and declare the inverse. You do not need to create a property chain

Property chain:

{{{
'subject participant in' o isP o inverse('target participant in') SubPropertyOf P-to
}}}

 

=== Examples ===

TODO - fill in when OntoBee online

See also GloBI:


 * (1) Poelen, J. H., Simons, J. D., & Mungall, C. J. (2014). Global Biotic Interactions: An open infrastructure to share and analyze species-interaction datasets. Ecological Informatics, 24, 148–159. doi:10.1016/j.ecoinf.2014.08.005

=== Drawbacks of OWL pattern ===

  * complex
  * abstruse
  * outside EL subset of OWL (doesn't work with Elk)

=== Future plans ===

We need a high-level way to define these, and derive OWL patterns from this (e.g. Tawny-OWL)

Explore use of rule languages

=== Interaction Subsets ===

We make a subset of RO with every release that is just interaction relations. Subsets of this (e.g. for biotic interactions) can be made on request.

  * http://purl.obolibrary.org/obo/ro/subsets/ro-interaction.owl