#summary Treatment of time in RO

= Introduction =

Relationships such as 'part_of' can change over time. For example, a cell can be part of the neuroepithelium at one time, and then detached from it at a later time.

For a detailed treatment, see the [http://genomebiology.com/2005/6/5/R46 original RO paper]. Unfortunately the relations in this paper are difficult to represent directly in OWL. Our current strategy is to use "atemporal" binary relations such as part_of with the understanding that the spirit of the RO paper should be followed - i.e. any class axioms such as "nucleus SubClassOf part_of some cell" should be understood to hold true for any "snapshot" in time.

We are currently working on a more formal treatment. One possible approach is to use 'temporalized relations', but this suffers from problems, and the RO is unlikely to adopt these in the near future. See [https://github.com/cmungall/trel-crit/raw/master/trc.pdf this critique of BFO2] for more details.

A more promising approach is either a separate interpretation or [TemporallyQualifiedContinuants], but work on this proposal has not yet been completed.

= Rough Sketch of Approach =

The spirit of the approach is to treat class axioms in OWL as if they had the same meaning as class-level relations in RO2005.

For example:

(1)
{{{
Class: nucleus
SubClassOf: part_of some cell
}}}

Is equivalent to writing the following FOL:

(2)
{{{
 forall n :
    instance_of(n,Nucleus)
     ->
    exists c :
      instance_of(c,Cell)
      part_of(n,c)
}}}

But our goal is to provide a temporal interpretation, as follows:

(3)
{{{
forall t :
  forall n :
    instance_of(n,Nucleus,t)
     ->
    exists c :
      instance_of(c,Cell,t)
      part_of(n,c,t)
}}}

What is currently lacking are global generic rules that can be applied for any OWL axiom - class axiom or instance axiom. Whilst these are being developed, this rough sketch provides some guidelines.

The basic idea for class axioms is to assume a "forall t" quantifier surrounding the direct FOL translation of the OWL. In addition, the same "t" variable should be added for all property assertions where a temporal argument is required. For example, the the OWL class axiom (1) above has the direct meaning:

By applying the transformation specified roughly above, we move from (2) to(3).

There will be exceptions to this patterns, these will be documented in the relations themselves.

= Inline Documentation =

Many RO relations are annotated with a "temporal interpretation" property:

 * [http://purl.obolibrary.org/obo/RO_0000052 RO_0000052] "temporal interpretation"

This connects an OWL object property to documentation describing how the relation should be interpreted.

= Other examples =

The Gene Ontology (extended version) contains axioms such as:

(1)
{{{
(part_of some Nucleus) DisjointWith (part_of some mitochondrion)
}}}


This has a direct interpretation that is atemporal:

(2)
{{{
not
  exists i, n, m:
    part_of(i,n) &
    part_of(i,m) &
    instance_of(n,Nucleus) &
    instance_of(m,Mitochondrion)
}}}

Applying the rule above we get:

(3)
{{{
forall t : [
 not
  exists i, n, m:
    part_of(i,n,t) &
    part_of(i,m,t) &
    instance_of(n,Nucleus,t) &
    instance_of(m,Mitochondrion,t)
]
}}}

= See Also =

 * [ROAndBFO]