#summary Interoperation with BFO

= Introduction =

This page describes the current status of interoperation between RO and BFO

= Details =

== RO and BFO2 ==

RO historically use of BFO in two ways:

 * Upper level *classes* from BFO are used to make constraints such as domain/range on relations
 * RO ceded "core" *relations* such as [http://purl.obolibrary.org/obo/BFO_0000050 part_of] to BFO

This plan was conceived in 2010 before the release of BFO2. At the time of writing (March 2013), the current BFO2 proposal is to use so-called 'temporalized relations' such as [http://purl.obolibrary.org/obo/BFO_0000177 http://purl.obolibrary.org/obo/BFO_0000137].

At this time RO is *not* adopting temporalized relations. The views of one of the RO developers (cjm) is expressed in [https://github.com/cmungall/trel-crit/raw/master/trc.pdf this critique of BFO2 OWL].

Instead, RO will re-use BFO2 relations that are not temporalized, and will create new relations that are not temporalized.

For example, the [http://purl.obolibrary.org/obo/BFO_0000066 BFO_0000066 occurs_in] relation from BFO2 OWL will be re-used directly. In contrast BFO2 OWL relations such as bearer-of-at-all-times will *not* be used. Instead a distinct RO relation [http://purl.obolibrary.org/obo/RO_0000053 RO_0000054 bearer-of] is used.


=== Part-of ===

For historic reasons, RO has made use of a small number of relations with BFO IDs. For example:

 * [http://purl.obolibrary.org/obo/BFO_0000050 BFO_0000050 part_of] 
 * [http://purl.obolibrary.org/obo/BFO_0000051 BFO_0000051 has_part]

Note that these will *not* be incorporated into the BFO2 OWL release.

However, it should be noted that *these are valid RO relations* - they are defined in the RO, and will be maintained by the RO developers so long as users require them.

=== Relations re-used from BFO2 OWL ===

RO also makes use of others relations that are either uncontroversial (non-temporalized) parts of BFO2, or that will be incorporated in the future.

 * [http://purl.obolibrary.org/obo/BFO_0000060 BFO_0000060 preceded by] (not in BFO2, but may be in the future. We assume this is the transitive form)
 * [http://purl.obolibrary.org/obo/BFO_0000060 BFO_0000063 precedes] `*` (not in BFO2, but may be in the future. We assume this is the transitive form)
 * [http://purl.obolibrary.org/obo/BFO_0000066 BFO_0000066 occurs_in] (in BFO2)

=== non-temporalized RO relations ===

In previous versions of RO we made use of other unofficial non-temporalized relations. To avoid potential clashes with temporalized relations with different meanings, we have decided to create separate IDs with RO prefixes:

  * inheres in [http://purl.obolibrary.org/obo/BFO_0000052 BFO_0000052] ==>  [http://purl.obolibrary.org/obo/RO_0000052 RO_0000052] 
 * bearer of [http://purl.obolibrary.org/obo/BFO_0000053 BFO_0000053] ==>  [http://purl.obolibrary.org/obo/RO_0000053 RO_0000053]
 * participates in [http://purl.obolibrary.org/obo/BFO_0000056 BFO_0000056]  ==>  [http://purl.obolibrary.org/obo/RO_0000056 RO_0000056] 
 * has participant [http://purl.obolibrary.org/obo/BFO_0000057 BFO_0000057]  ==>  [http://purl.obolibrary.org/obo/RO_0000057 RO_0000057] 

== Availability ==

The current home of these relations is in:

 * http://purl.obolibrary.org/obo/ro/core.owl

This is imported by the main RO

See [ROCore] for more details.

== RO and BFO Classes ==

Note that RO should still be compatible with the classes from BFO.

The above relations import ontology imports a set of BFO classes that are a subset of the current BFO2 classes.

 * TODO: resolve processural entity/process distinction

== Temporal interpretations ==

See [ROAndTime]