
## Class : interacts with

 * *IRI* = http://purl.obolibrary.org/obo/RO_0002434
 * *Label* = interacts with
 * *Definition* = A relationship that holds between two entities in which the processes executed by the two entities are causally connected.

## Synonyms

 * in pairwise interaction with

## Cross-references


## Subsets

 * http://purl.obolibrary.org/obo/ro/subsets#ro-eco

## SuperProperties


## SubProperties


## Other Logical Axioms

 * SymmetricObjectProperty [interacts with](../../RO/34/RO_0002434.md)
 * [interacts with](../../RO/34/RO_0002434.md) Domain [material entity](../../BFO/40/BFO_0000040.md)
 * [interacts with](../../RO/34/RO_0002434.md) Range [material entity](../../BFO/40/BFO_0000040.md)

## Other Annotations

 * *[definition](../../IAO/15/IAO_0000115.md)* = A relationship that holds between two entities in which the processes executed by the two entities are causally connected.
 * *[editor note](../../IAO/16/IAO_0000116.md)* = Considering relabeling as 'pairwise interacts with'
 * *[editor note](../../IAO/16/IAO_0000116.md)* = This relation and all sub-relations can be applied to either (1) pairs of entities that are interacting at any moment of time (2) populations or species of entity whose members have the disposition to interact (3) classes whose members have the disposition to interact.
 * *[term editor](../../IAO/17/IAO_0000117.md)* = Chris Mungall
 * *[curator note](../../IAO/32/IAO_0000232.md)* = Note that this relationship type, and sub-relationship types may be redundant with process terms from other ontologies. For example, the symbiotic relationship hierarchy parallels GO. The relations are provided as a convenient shortcut. Consider using the more expressive processual form to capture your data. In the future, these relations will be linked to their cognate processes through rules.
 * *[has_exact_synonym](../../ym/oboInOwl#hasExactSynonym.md)* = in pairwise interaction with
 * *[in_subset](../../et/oboInOwl#inSubset.md)* = http://purl.obolibrary.org/obo/ro/subsets#ro-eco
 * *[rdf-schema#label](../../el/rdf-schema#label.md)* = interacts with
 * *[rdf-schema#seeAlso](../../so/rdf-schema#seeAlso.md)* = http://purl.obolibrary.org/obo/MI_0914
 * *[page](../../ge/page.md)* = https://code.google.com/p/obo-relations/wiki/InteractionRelations

## Usage

 * -
 * SymmetricObjectProperty [interacts with](../../RO/34/RO_0002434.md)
 * [biotically interacts with](../../RO/37/RO_0002437.md) SubPropertyOf [interacts with](../../RO/34/RO_0002434.md)
 * [genetically interacts with](../../RO/35/RO_0002435.md) SubPropertyOf [interacts with](../../RO/34/RO_0002434.md)
 * [interacts with](../../RO/34/RO_0002434.md) Domain [material entity](../../BFO/40/BFO_0000040.md)
 * [interacts with](../../RO/34/RO_0002434.md) Range [material entity](../../BFO/40/BFO_0000040.md)
 * [molecularly interacts with](../../RO/36/RO_0002436.md) SubPropertyOf [interacts with](../../RO/34/RO_0002434.md)

## External Comments

