
## Class : concretizes

 * *IRI* = http://purl.obolibrary.org/obo/RO_0000059
 * *Label* = concretizes
 * *Definition* = A relationship between a specifically dependent continuant and a generically dependent continuant, in which the generically dependent continuant depends on some independent continuant in virtue of the fact that the specifically dependent continuant also depends on that same independent continuant. Multiple specifically dependent continuants can concretize the same generically dependent continuant.

## Synonyms


## Cross-references


## Subsets


## SuperProperties


## SubProperties


## Other Logical Axioms

 * [concretizes](../../RO/59/RO_0000059.md) Domain [specifically dependent continuant](../../BFO/20/BFO_0000020.md)
 * [concretizes](../../RO/59/RO_0000059.md) Range [generically dependent continuant](../../BFO/31/BFO_0000031.md)
 * [is concretized as](../../RO/58/RO_0000058.md) InverseOf [concretizes](../../RO/59/RO_0000059.md)

## Other Annotations

 * *[example of usage](../../IAO/12/IAO_0000112.md)* = A journal article is an information artifact that inheres in some number of printed journals. For each copy of the printed journal there is some quality that carries the journal article, such as a pattern of ink. The quality (a specifically dependent continuant) concretizes the journal article (a generically dependent continuant), and both depend on that copy of the printed journal (an independent continuant).
 * *[example of usage](../../IAO/12/IAO_0000112.md)* = An investigator reads a protocol and forms a plan to carry out an assay. The plan is a realizable entity (a specifically dependent continuant) that concretizes the protocol (a generically dependent continuant), and both depend on the investigator (an independent continuant). The plan is then realized by the assay (a process).
 * *[definition](../../IAO/15/IAO_0000115.md)* = A relationship between a specifically dependent continuant and a generically dependent continuant, in which the generically dependent continuant depends on some independent continuant in virtue of the fact that the specifically dependent continuant also depends on that same independent continuant. Multiple specifically dependent continuants can concretize the same generically dependent continuant.
 * *[rdf-schema#label](../../el/rdf-schema#label.md)* = concretizes

## Usage

 * -
 * [concretizes](../../RO/59/RO_0000059.md) Domain [specifically dependent continuant](../../BFO/20/BFO_0000020.md)
 * [concretizes](../../RO/59/RO_0000059.md) Range [generically dependent continuant](../../BFO/31/BFO_0000031.md)
 * [is concretized as](../../RO/58/RO_0000058.md) InverseOf [concretizes](../../RO/59/RO_0000059.md)

## External Comments

